# The impact of the spatial heterogeneity of resistant cells and fibroblasts on treatment response
Abstract

A long-standing practice in the treatment of cancer is that of hitting hard with the maximum tolerated dose to eradicate tumors. This continuous therapy, however, selects for resistant cells, leading to the failure of the treatment. A different type of treatment strategy, adaptive therapy, has recently been shown to have a degree of success in both preclinical xenograft experiments and clinical trials. Adaptive therapy is used to maintain a tumor's volume by exploiting the competition between drug-sensitive and drug-resistant cells with minimum effective drug doses or timed drug holidays. To further understand the role of competition in the outcomes of adaptive therapy, we developed a 2D on-lattice agent-based model. Our simulations show that the superiority of the adaptive strategy over continuous therapy depends on the local competition shaped by the spatial distribution of resistant cells. Intratumor competition can also be affected by fibroblasts, which produce microenvironmental factors that promote cancer cell growth. To this end, we simulated the impact of different fibroblast distributions on treatment outcomes.  As proof of principle, we focused on five types of distribution of fibroblasts characterized by different locations, shapes, and orientations of the fibroblast region with respect to the resistant cells. Our simulation shows that the spatial architecture of fibroblasts modulates tumor progression in both continuous and adaptive therapy. Finally, as a proof of concept, we simulated the outcomes of adaptive therapy of a virtual patient with four metastatic sites composed of different spatial distributions of fibroblasts and drug-resistant cell populations. Our simulation highlights the importance of undetected metastatic lesions on adaptive therapy outcomes. 

Articel preprint: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.06.01.446525v1

The code ("ProstateCancerGrid.java") is developed using HAL platform(https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007635). It can be used to reproduce the single metastasis results in the above prerpint. To use the code the following steps would work.

1. Install HAL(https://github.com/MathOnco/HAL).
2. Make a folder "ProstateCancer" in the directory "C:\HAL-master\".
3. Copy all the files in the directory "C:\HAL-master\ProstateCancer".
4. Provide one of the csv files as input file in line 192.
5. Set the output file name and directory in line 223.
6. Set the parameter values in lines 123-133 and 180-181.
7. Choose any of the fibroblast strucutres from lines 149-156.
8. Run "ProstateCancerGrid.java"


"Fig04.m" can be used to generate figure 4 of the manuscript, provided all required csv files are generated using "ProstateCancerGrid.java" and the directories in "Fig04.m" are updated according to the location of the csv files.

"Fig08.m" can be used to generate figure 8 of the manuscript. Fib_SQC.csv Fib_SQO.csv Fib_SQ2.csv Fib_OU1.csv Fib_clump.csv are the csv files with infromation regarding the fibroblast structures. The other csv files should be generated by execeuting the java file following the steps mentioned above for each type of fibroblast structure. The file directories should be properly modified in the m file before execution.

**Main code defining the model:**

ProstateCancerGrid.java The java file that includes the agent based model

**Input files:**

clumpInput_001.csv      Input file for N(0)=5000,f0=1%, with clumped initial R-cell distribution

clumpInput_010.csv      Input file for N(0)=5000,f0=10%, with clumped initial R-cell distribution

clumpInput_70_001.csv   Input file for N(0)=7000,f0=1%, with clumped initial R-cell distribution

clumpInput_70_010.csv   Input file for N(0)=7000,f0=10%, with clumped initial R-cell distribution

randomInput_001.csv     Input file for N(0)=5000,f0=1%, with random initial R-cell distribution

randomInput_010.csv     Input file for N(0)=5000,f0=10%, with random initial R-cell distribution

randomInput_70_001.csv  Input file for N(0)=7000,f0=1%, with random initial R-cell distribution

randomInput_70_010.csv  Input file for N(0)=7000,f0=10%, with random initial R-cell distribution

unifInput_001.csv       Input file for N(0)=5000,f0=1%, with uniform initial R-cell distribution

unifInput_010.csv       Input file for N(0)=5000,f0=10%, with uniform initial R-cell distribution

unifInput_70_001.csv    Input file for N(0)=7000,f0=1%, with uniform initial R-cell distribution

unifInput_70_010.csv    Input file for N(0)=7000,f0=10%, with uniform initial R-cell distribution


**Fibroblast structures:**

Fib_OU1.csv Fibroblast distribution in the csae of FSp

Fib_SQ2.csv Fibroblast distribution in the csae of FSq

Fib_SQC.csv Fibroblast distribution in the csae of FC

Fib_SQO.csv Fibroblast distribution in the csae of FCp

Fib_clump.csv Fibroblast distribution in the csae of FR


**Example Matlab files for plotting:**

fig04.m

fig08.m




For any further query please feel free to contact us.
